ADR: frontend templates; higher level overview (#278)
algorandfoundation/algokit-cli: docs/architecture-decisions/2023-06-06_frontend-templates.md

# Frontend Templates

- **Status**: Draft (rev 3)
- **Owner:** Altynbek Orumbayev
- **Deciders**: TBD
- **Date created**: 2023-06-06
- **Date decided:** TBD
- **Date updated**: 2023-06-08

## Context

AlgoKit v2 aims provide an end-to-end development and deployment experience that includes support for the end-to-end smart contract and dApp development lifecycle. With the release of the typed clients feature - developers are now able to reduce the time it takes to fully integrate the interactions between the contract and the frontend components powering the end-to-end dapp user experience. Hence, as a logical continuation, the following Architecture Decision Record aims to expand on the current capabilities of AlgoKit to support the `frontend` templates, an [AlgoKit Principles](https://github.com/algorandfoundation/algokit-cli/blob/main/docs/algokit.md#guiding-principles) compliant approach towards simplifying integrations of smart contracts with the dApp frontend components.

## Requirements

> - **Modularity**: The dApp templating feature should follow guiding AlgoKit principles and expand on approaches already utilized in existing smart contract templates feature. This implies that giving developers flexibility to mix and match different `smart contract` templates with `frontend` templates should serve as key consideration.

Author: Agreed this traveled from previous draft revisions where i was still exploring on options. Updated with requirements section that reflects on the proposal in latest revision. Feel free to un-resolve if you think there are still items to modify.

- **Maintainability**: The dApp templating feature should be easy to maintain and extend. This implies that the feature should be implemented in a way that allows for easy addition of new templates and/or modification of existing ones as the complexity and variety of templates scale.
- **Seamless onramp**: The dApp templating feature should provide a seamless onramp for developers to get started with dApp development. This implies that the feature should provide a simple and intuitive way to get started with dApp development and deployment. Providing developers a choice on whether they want more flexibility or rely on default recommended practices.

## Principles

- [AlgoKit Guiding Principles](../../docs/algokit.md#Guiding-Principles) - all of the aforementioned requirements should be met in a way that is consistent with the guiding principles of AlgoKit or attempt to find a balanced trade of between the principles that satisfies the requirements.

## Options

> Expanding AlgoKit templating capabilities is a non-trivial task that requires careful consideration of the trade-offs between the different approaches. The following section outlines the different options that were considered and the trade-offs associated with each of them.

Author: Expanded on that point. Feel free to un-resolve if you think there are still items to modify.

> > Refer to git history to see old revisions of the document. After further discussions with the team we are now aligned on the separate repositories approach. Hence the sections below are updated to reflect the new approach.

Reviewer: Rather than doing this if we had other ptions we considered we should include them in the decision record so we can articulate the pros/cons and why we didn't explore them.

## The proposal

> The proposal consists of 2 main parts. On a high level, the ideas revolve around giving developers a choice on how they want to couple AlgoKit backend and frontend templates if they like to use custom templates. The other is focused on providing an official full-stack template that bundles both backend and frontend templates together, while also serving as an example for template builders on how to efficiently couple their backend and frontend templates.

Reviewer: Minor "couple their backend and frontend templates." - not just frontend and backend, any combination of multiple templates they may want.

Author: Should be addressed now. Feel free to un-resolve if you think there are still items to modify.

The following aims to provide a seamless onramp for developers to get started with highly customizable dApp starter projects. The idea is to create a set of separate official frontend template repositories to serve as:
a) A reference for template builders on how to create standalone frontend templates that can be then further coupled with any backend template.
b) Expand on AlgoKit principles of modularity, maintainability and flexibility by giving developers a choice of preffered technological stack.

The official standalone frontend templates can be build by reusing already established best practices and templates from official backend repositores and by continuing reliance on `copier` for template automation. Another important consideration to keep in mind is that with the introduction of frontend templates we need to establish a clear separation of concerns between the backend and frontend templates to ensure modularity.

![Diagram 1](assets/2023-06-06_frontend-templates/modular_templates.jpg)

> As demonstrated on the diagram above, the only glue connecting the backend and frontend is the generated typed client. Neither backend or frontend templates should be concerned with the other but instead provide modular interfaces that clearly indicate to developers on how to integrate the two. From a perspective of a backend template, the typed client can be seen as a `public` folder in modern web frameworks, a static asset that can be reused by any frontend template. Frontend templates on the other hand are mostly standard web projects with an additional layer of utilities that optionally allow them to be integrated with typed clients produced by backend templates.

Reviewer: > the typed client can be seen as a `public` folder in modern web frameworks

I think I understand the point you are making, but given it will be TypeScript code it can't actually be in the public folder of most web frameworks since that is packaged as-is rather than compiled into JavaScript.

Author: I removed the sentence with public folder to avoid confusion, this wasn't implying that we store them in public folder in literal sense but more of an analogy. As with most web frameworks you can expect existence of public folder with static assets - when dealing with algokit backend templates you should expect existence of a special folder that hosts typed clients

Lastly, community template builders will get a platform to increase discoverability of their templates and further incentivise them to build and maintain them. While developers using the templates can support creators of templates by donating to their projects (a simple tipping mechanism for Algo and ASAs can be embedded into the website) or by contributing to the templates themselves.

> This approach can be explored and maintained without overlapping with main proposal on frontend templates.

---

## Final decision

To be decided

> The final decision is being finalized but the team is currently leaning in favor towards the proposal outlined in the Architecture Decision Record. Hence, this revision excluded the details of other options considered and adds more decision specific details to the approach with having separate self-sufficient frontend templates.

## Open questions

> - Python typed clients are not going to be too relevant for scenarios where they need to be integrated with frontends given that in majority of cases a developer would prefer a TS typed client. Hence, how do we ensure that user gets a clear information and indication on when to use Python typed clients vs TS typed clients?

Reviewer: This is a fair comment, but to my mind it's a clear dilineation in that it's dependant on what language you are using.

While there are Python website libraries, we aren't using them we will use JavaScript (TypeScript).

- - Would we want to introduce a notion of non smart contract based backend templates that can be used to plug in the python typed clients and spin up servers that can be used to build APIs that interact with the smart contracts?

## Next steps

After the final decision is made, the action items necessary to implement the described proposal can be outlined as follows:

> 1. **Design and Development of Independent Frontend Templates**: This involves selecting appropriate technology stacks and building out the templates. Each of these templates should be able to work with the generated typed client from the backend.

Reviewer: I think we are only doing 1 rather than multiple, obviously community contributions can create separate ones though.

Author: Tweaked to explicitly state that its a single repo

> 2. **Development of AlgoKit CLI Linking Utility**: As per the proposal, a new CLI utility should be introduced that will automate the linking between frontend and backend templates with the typed client.

Reviewer: I'm not sure we need this?

> 3. **Development of End-to-End Starter Repositories**: This involves building comprehensive templates that bundle both frontend and backend components. These templates should be designed to be easy to maintain and should leverage the metatemplating capabilities of `copier` for efficient reuse of existing standalone templates.

Reviewer: Again, I think we would only create a single template

Author: Tweaked to explicitly state that its a single repo

# Frontend Templates

- **Status**: Draft (rev 2)
- **Owner:** Altynbek Orumbayev
- **Deciders**: TBD
- **Date created**: 2023-06-06
- **Date decided:** TBD
- **Date updated**: 2023-06-07

## Context

> AlgoKit v2 aims provide an end-to-end development and deployment experience that includes support for the end-to-end smart contract and dApp development lifecycle. With the release of the typed clients feature - developers are now able to reduce the time it takes to fully integrate the interactions between the contract and the frontend components powering the e2e dapp user experience. Hence, as a logical continuation, the following ADR aims to expand on the current capabilities of AlgoKit to support the `frontend` templates, an [AlgoKit Principles](https://github.com/algorandfoundation/algokit-cli/blob/main/docs/algokit.md#guiding-principles) compliant approach towards simplifying integrations of smart contracts with the dApp frontend components.

Reviewer: 'e2e' -> 'end-to-end' (prefer to avoid acronyms for clearer communication).

Reviewer: Also 'ADR' -> 'Architecture Decision Record'

- Versioning is simpler as all code lives in one repo.
- Ability to have a very polished frontend client tailored specifically for the smart contract template.
- Collaboration among maintainers of official templates becomes easier as all code lives in one repo and it is easier to coordinate and observe changes.

#### Cons

- Without proper supervision over automation, the repository may become large and complex, leading to slower CI/CD pipeline execution times.
- It might violate the principle of modularity and loosely coupled components, which can be beneficial for parallel development and reduced complexity.

#### Examples

Folder structure (ref official beaker template):

```md
.
├── README.md
├── copier.yaml
├── poetry.lock
├── poetry.toml
├── pyproject.toml
├── template_content
├── contracts
├── frontend
├── .algokit.toml // with new params that aid with frontend templating
└── ...
├── tests
└── tests_generated
```

A good reference example of bundling frontends and backens in a single repo that relies on jinja: https://github.com/tiangolo/full-stack-fastapi-postgresql/tree/master

---

> ### Option 2. Separate templates repositories

Reviewer 2: A variation on this may be to allow `algokit init` on an existing repo so that a frontend template can be applied to a repo that already contains a backend. The .alogkit.toml could be leveraged with the variables described earlier to help coordinate this.

Additionally we could provide template definitions that include multiple template repo references, and the CLI then essentially runs `algokit init` on each template. This would allow for a more streamlined experience without increasing the verbosity of the commands

Author: Agreed, ill resolve the conversation as there is a third revision now that focuses on the proposals that the team currently agrees with the most and adds more implementation specific decision points. Feel free to check the new revision

## Context

AlgoKit v2 aims provide an end-to-end development and deployment experience that includes support for the end-to-end smart contract and dApp development lifecycle. With the release of the typed clients feature - developers are now able to reduce the time it takes to fully integrate the interactions between the contract and the frontend components powering the end-to-end dapp user experience. Hence, as a logical continuation, the following Architecture Decision Record aims to expand on the current capabilities of AlgoKit to support the `frontend` templates, an [AlgoKit Principles](https://github.com/algorandfoundation/algokit-cli/blob/main/docs/algokit.md#guiding-principles) compliant approach towards simplifying integrations of smart contracts with the dApp frontend components.

## Requirements

### Independent Frontend Templates

1. Create official frontend template that complies with AlgoKit's principles of modularity, maintainability, and flexibility while also serving as a reference for template builders.

2. Expand algokit functionality to provide a clear process for developers to link frontend templates with the typed clients generated by backend templates.

> 3. Design frontend templates such that backend and frontend have less than zero dependencies on each other, ensuring high modularity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Design frontend templates such that backend and frontend have no dependencies on each other, ensuring high modularity.
```

### End-to-End Starter Repositories

1. Establish a starter repository that allows developers to bootstrap end-to-end dApp projects within a single command, while also serving as an example for template builders on how to efficiently couple their backend and frontend templates.

> 2. Implement a bundling process for backend and frontend templates in the starter repositories that code duplication and maintenance overhead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Implement a bundling process for backend and frontend templates in the starter repositories that reduce code duplication and maintenance overhead.
```

The following aims to provide a seamless onramp for developers to get started with highly customizable dApp starter projects. The idea is to create a set of separate official frontend template repositories to serve as:
a) A reference for template builders on how to create standalone frontend templates that can be then further coupled with any backend template.
b) Expand on AlgoKit principles of modularity, maintainability and flexibility by giving developers a choice of preferred technological stack.

The official standalone frontend templates can be build by reusing already established best practices and templates from official backend repositories and by continuing reliance on `copier` for template automation. Another important consideration to keep in mind is that with the introduction of frontend templates we need to establish a clear separation of concerns between the backend and frontend templates to ensure modularity.

> ![Diagram 1](assets/2023-06-06_frontend-templates/modular_templates.jpg)

Reviewer 2: Love this diagram!

Author: Glad you liked it, i found it a bit redundant to work with static assets though, next time ill try using mermaid js instead so it will be easier and faster to iterate

As demonstrated on the diagram above, the only glue connecting the backend and frontend is the generated typed client. Neither backend or frontend templates should be concerned with the other but instead provide modular interfaces that clearly indicate to developers on how to integrate the two. From a perspective of a backend template, the typed client shall be seen as a static asset that can be reused by any frontend template. Frontend templates on the other hand are mostly standard web projects with an additional layer of utilities that optionally allow them to be integrated with typed clients produced by backend templates.

#### Higher level overview

The main scenario to support for this part is to allow developers to use official starter templates to bootstrap end to end dApp projects.

> ![Diagram 2](assets/2023-06-06_frontend-templates/scenario_1.jpg)

Reviewer 2: Minor: example CLI command on the right should refer to a front end url?

> This approach can be explored and maintained without overlapping with main proposal on frontend templates.

---

## Final decision

To be decided

> The final decision is being finalized but the team is currently leaning in favor towards the proposal outlined in the Architecture Decision Record. Hence, this revision excluded the details of other options considered and adds more decision specific details to the approach with having separate self-sufficient frontend templates.

## Open questions

- Python typed clients are not going to be too relevant for scenarios where they need to be integrated with frontends given that in majority of cases a developer would prefer a TS typed client. Hence, how do we ensure that user gets a clear information and indication on when to use Python typed clients vs TS typed clients? `Answer: This is a fair comment, but to my mind it's a clear dilineation in that it's dependant on what language you are using. While there are Python website libraries, we aren't using them we will use JavaScript (TypeScript).`

> - - Would we want to introduce a notion of non smart contract based backend templates that can be used to plug in the python typed clients and spin up servers that can be used to build APIs that interact with the smart contracts? `Answer: This is definitely out of scope of dApp stuff`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Would we want to introduce a notion of non smart contract based backend templates that can be used to plug in the python typed clients and spin up servers that can be used to build APIs that interact with the smart contracts? `Answer: This is definitely out of scope of dApp stuff`
```

## Requirements

> - **Modularity**: The dApp templating feature should follow guiding AlgoKit principles and expand on approaches already utilized in existing smart contract templates feature. This implies that giving developers flexibility to mix and match different `smart contract` templates with `frontend` templates should serve as key consideration.

Reviewer: @aorumbayev  These were good, I think it makes sense to keep them in principles since they are a specific reflection for this on how those broader principles apply.

Author: I figured since there is a ref directly to a markdown with all of these outlined it may seem redundant but i refined the principles section a bit so should be addressed now.

3. Develop deployment pipelines for frontend components inside end-to-end starter repository that supports TestNet, and MainNet deployments to hosting providers of choice (Netlify, Vercel and etc to be decided).
4. Ensure that the end-to-end starter repository supports both manual deployment and deployment via a continuous deployment pipeline.

## Principles

- [AlgoKit Guiding Principles](../../docs/algokit.md#Guiding-Principles) - all of the aforementioned requirements should be met in a way that is consistent with the guiding principles of AlgoKit or attempt to find a balanced trade of between the principles that satisfies the requirements.

## Explored options

Enhancing AlgoKit's templating capabilities involves a notable shift from managing individual templates to co-locating multiple templates or projects together. This is a marked increase in complexity that requires careful consideration of the varying trade-offs between different approaches. The subsequent sections explore these options and their associated trade-offs, providing a concise overview of this new challenge and our proposed solutions.

> ### Option 1: Monorepos

Reviewer: I'm not quite sure this is the right name for this option.

Monorepo implies single repository, multiple projects.

The description below sounds more like "Monolithic template" to me?

> ### Option 1: Monorepos

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Option 1: Monolithic template
```

This option suggests that the frontend and backend templates should be bundled together in a single repository. This approach aims to simplify the maintenance of the templates by reducing the number of repositories that need to be maintained. Both official and community templates should be build on top of this approach where frontend is always tailored for specific needs of the smart contracts that are being used.

Drawbacks:

- **Lack of flexibility**: The monorepo approach does not allow developers to choose their preferred frontend technology stack. This is because the frontend is tightly coupled with the backend and the two cannot be separated. This is a major drawback as it limits the flexibility of the templates and does not allow developers to choose their preferred frontend technology stack.

> - **Increased maintenance overhead**: The monorepo approach increases the maintenance overhead as it requires the templates to be updated together.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if I agree with this, I'd say it's actually less maintenance to have one repository? The flexibility is a big issue as is the fact that as soon as you want to have a different (say) frontend variant you would then need to copy all of the smart contract stuff into that second template (that's a maintenance overhead though).

Author: Agree with your point, should be refined now to reflect the note

> ### Option 2: Separate Repositories

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Option 2: Decoupled templates
```

This option suggests that the frontend and backend templates should be maintained in separate repositories. This approach aims to provide developers with the flexibility to choose their preferred frontend technology stack. It also allows the templates to be maintained independently, thereby reducing the maintenance overhead.

After several review rounds team reached a conclusion that this approach is not ideal for the following reasons:

Drawbacks:

- **Compatibility overhead**: The separate repositories approach increases the maintenance overhead as it requires the templates to be updated independently. This can lead to issues with compatibility between the templates and the typed clients.
- **Lack of guidance**: The separate repositories approach does not provide developers with a clear process for linking the frontend templates with the typed clients generated by the backend templates. This can lead to confusion and issues with the integration of the templates.

> After several review rounds team reached a conclusion to expand on this option given better alignment with AlgoKit design principles. Hence, the following proposal is further exploration of ideas based on this approach and propose solution to mitigate the potential drawbacks and risks outlined.

Reviewer: Minor: You can probably drop this paragraph and have a section towards the end that describes the selected option based on all of the options.

Reviewer 2: I agree this would be clearer, as I was a bit confused by these two conflicting statements:

>After several review rounds team reached a conclusion that this approach is not ideal for the following reasons:

>After several review rounds team reached a conclusion to expand on this option given better alignment with AlgoKit design principles

> ## The proposal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Option 3: Fullstack 'stitching' template
```

Reviewer: You might need to restructure the below content to make this third option clearer and then possibly split out an implementation section with the detail.
